Paper: Identifying Stable Patterns over Time for Emotion Recognition from EEG
Datasets used : DEAP and SEED

Question Asked:
What is the capability of EEG signals for discriminating between different emotions?
Are there any stable EEg patterns of neural oscillations or brain regions for representing emotions?
What is the day to day performance of model based on machine learning approaches?



The experimental results reveal the neural signatures for three emoitions (positive, neutral and negative)


Main aim:
Investigate stable EEG patterns over time using time frequency analysis and machine learning approaches
Using dataset which is subset of the SEED dataset

Deature extraction:
Electrodes and features efficient combinations for emotion recognition

Power Spectral Density (PSD), differential entropy(DE), differential asymmentry(DASM),
Rational Asymmetry (RASM), Asymmetry(ASM), and differential Caudality(DCAU)


Using linear dynamic system approach to filter out components that are not associated with emotional status

The extracted features are further fed to three conventional patterns classifiers ie KNN, logistic regression and support vector machines

Extraction of PSD, DE, DASM, RASM,
ASM and DCAU features of the 32-channel EEG data.
The original EEG data from the DEAP dataset were
preprocessed with down-sampling to 128 Hz and a
bandpass frequency filter from 4.0-45.0 Hz, and EOG
artifacts were removed. Therefore, we extracted the
features in the four frequency bands: theta: 4-7 Hz,
alpha: 8-13 Hz, beta: 14-30 Hz, and gamma: 31-45 Hz.
The features were further smoothed using the linear
dynamic system approach. We then selected SVM and
GELM as the classifiers. In this study, we used the
SVM classifier with a linear kernel, and the number of
hidden layer neurons for GELM was fixed as 10 times
the dimensions of the input. To use the entire data set
for training and testing the classifiers, a 5-fold crossvalidation scheme was adopted. All the experiments
were performed with 5-fold cross-validation, and the
classification performance was evaluated using the
classification accuracy rate.

The DE features outperform the
PSD features significantly (p < 0.01), and for classifiers, the performance of GELM is better than that of SVM
(p < 0.01). As we can see from Table 3, the diversity of
classification accuracy for different frequency bands is
not significant for the DEAP dataset (p > 0.95).


Conclusion:
GELM with differential entropy features outperforms other methods. The best average classification accuracies of 69.67% and 91.0%
on the DEAP and SEED datasets respectively. 

The lateral temporal areas activate more for positive emotions than negative emotions in the beta and gama bands, the 
neural patterns of neutral emotions have higher alpha responses at parietal and occipital sites and higher gamma responses at prefrontal sites
The
experiment results also indicate that the stable EEG
patterns across sessions exhibit consistency among
repeated EEG measurements of the same participant

